revision lean (#56)
eliocamp/shceof: analysis/paper/shceof.Rmd

The large-scale extratropical circulation in the Southern Hemisphere is strongly zonally symmetric, but its zonal departures are highly relevant for surface impacts and could be related to high-impact climate extremes.
Zonal asymmetries of extratropical circulation in the Southern Hemisphere strongly modulate weather systems and regional climate through latitudinal transport of heat, humidity, and momentum [@trenberth1980].

One of the main features of the zonally asymmetric circulation are the Pacific--South American Patterns [@mo2001], which are associated with precipitation anomalies in South America. Besides, @raphael2007 suggests that variability in the planetary wave 3 projected onto its climatological location is associated with Antarctic sea ice concentration anomalies. @irving2015 showed that planetary wave amplitude in general is associated sea ice concentration, as well as temperature and precipitation anomalies.

> Some of these patterns of variability associated to the zonally asymmetric circulation appear to have experienced secular changes. @raphael2003 found that the amplitude of the zonal wave 1 experienced a large increase and that the zonal wave 3 experienced changes in its annual cycle between 1958 and 1996. \textcolor{red}{¿esto es lo único que encontraste asociado a esta afirmación? en caso de que si, diría de agregar que "ha sido poco estudiado hasta el momento"}

Author: las dos opciones me parece que están bien. Comenzaría la siguiente oración con un "For instance, Raphael..."

The use of data of only specific regions or locations makes them suitable for easy computation and for extending back into the data-poor past, but also makes them not very robust and unable to capture non-stationary patterns.

> Our objective is to create an index that is able to capture the phase-varying nature of planetary waves and is flexible enough to describe planetary waves with non-constant amplitude in each latitude circle. \textcolor{red}{yo no pondría que el objetivo es crear el índice, sino porfundizar el conocimiento de la variabilidad... utilizando un índice...}

Author: Our objective is to improve our understanding of planetary waves in the **Southern Hemisphere** using

## Data

> We used monthly geopotential height, air temperature, ozone mixing ratio, and total ozone column (TOC) at 2.5\degree longitude by 2.5\degree latitude of horizontal resolution and 37 vertical isobaric levels from ERA5 reanalysis [@era5] for the period 1979-2019.

Author: Así se llama el paper de Hersbach "The ERA5 global reanalysis" jaja
Sería más correcto entonces decir  algo como "European Centre for Medium‐Range Weather Reanalysis version 5 (ERA5; Hersbach et al., 2020)"

> We used monthly geopotential height, air temperature, ozone mixing ratio, and total ozone column (TOC) at 2.5\degree longitude by 2.5\degree latitude of horizontal resolution and 37 vertical isobaric levels from ERA5 reanalysis [@era5] for the period 1979-2019.

Reviewer: Me gustó. Agrego esto. 0

```suggestion
We used monthly geopotential height, air temperature, ozone mixing ratio, and total ozone column (TOC) at 2.5\degree longitude by 2.5\degree latitude of horizontal resolution and 37 vertical isobaric levels from the European Centre for Medium‐Range Weather Reanalysis version 5 [ERA; @era5] for the period 1979-2019.
```

We use 200 hPa level to represent the high troposphere and 50 hPa to represent the lower stratosphere.

The amplitude of the zonal waves was obtained through the Fourier transform of the spatial field at each latitude circle.
We computed the amplitude and phase of the zonal wave 1 by averaging (area-weighted) each variable between `r knitr::combine_words(LatLabel(o3wave_lats))` for each SON and extracting the wave-1 component of the Fourier spectrum.
We chose this latitude band because it is wide enough to capture most of the relevant anomalies for southern hemisphere mid-latitudes.

We computed the level-dependent SAM index as the leading EOF of year-round monthly geopotential height anomalies south of 20ºS at each level for the whole period according to @baldwin2009.
We further split the SAM into its zonally symmetric and zonally asymmetric components (S-SAM and A-SAM indices respectively).
These indices were obtained by projecting the zonally asymmetric and zonally symmetric part of the SAM spatial pattern onto monthly geopotential height fields, as proposed by @campitelli2021.

> The Pacific South American patterns (PSA1 and PSA2) were calculated following @mo2001 as the third and fourth leading EOF of seasonal mean anomalies for SH 500 hPa geopotential height combining all seasons \textcolor{red}{leyendo esto me queda la duda. Vos calculaste esto usando todos los meses y luego tomaste el valor de SON, no? Creo que valdría la pena aclararlo mejor, por lo menos a mi me resulta confuso}. 

Author: Agregaría "**In this study** only the SON values were used."

The wave patterns described by these cEOFs match the patterns seen in the traditional EOFs of Figure \@ref(fig:eof-naive).

\textcolor{red}{tengo la impresión de que en la figura 2 podría estar un poco más grandes los subplots para que se vean más fácilmente los detalles}

The first cEOF (Fig. \@ref(fig:ceofs-1) column a) is a hemispheric wave 1 pattern with maximum amplitude at high latitudes.
At 50 hPa the Real cEOF1 has the maximum of the wave 1 at 150ºE and at 200 hPa, the maximum is located at around 175ºE indicating a westerly shift in phase.
The cEOF2 (Fig. \@ref(fig:eof-naive) column b) shows also a zonal wave-like structure with maximum amplitude at high latitudes, but with shorter spatial scales.
In particular, its dominant structure at both levels is a wave 3 but with larger amplitude in the pacific sector.
This modulated amplitude is especially apparent at 200 hPa.
There is no apparent phase shift, suggesting a rather barotropic structure.

> \textcolor{red}{se me vino una duda, ¿se pueden comparar de algún modo las amplitudes que mostras en esta figura? en caso de que si, creo que habría que mencionar algo sobre lo que pasa con el cEOF2 en la estratósfera}

Author: Me parece bien el agregado

The temporal variability for both components of the cEOF1 have non zero mean (Fig. \@ref(fig:extended-series)). \textcolor{red}{Esto vale también para el cEOF2, ¿no? en ese caso, lo diría más en gral}
This is due to the fact that the geopotential fields that enter into the cEOFs algorithm are anomalies with respect to the zonal mean, not the time mean.

> As a consequence, the variability associated with the cEOF1 includes variability that projects onto the mean zonally anomalous field.

Author: ahí me parece mejor

There is only a significant upward trend in the real component of cEOF1 (Fig. \@ref(fig:extended-series)a.1, p-value `r trends[part == "Real" & cEOF == "cEOF1"]$p_report`) and no significant trend in any of the complex components of cEOF2.
The positive trend in the real cEOF1 translates into a positive trend in cEOF1 magnitude, but not in the phase (not shown). This long-term change indicates an increase in the magnitude of the high latitude zonal wave 1.
A similar observation was made by @raphael2003, who detected a step after around 1975 in the leading EOF of August-September-October 500 hPa zonal geopotential height anomalies.

> \textcolor{red}{Creo que acá faltaría decir que el modo del trabajo de Raphael se parece al que estás mostrando vos, sino no tendria mucho sentido la comapración.}

Author: Está bien el cambio aunque no le pondría "our CEOF1", sino "the CEOF1" (más que nuestro sería calculado por nosotros, pero creo que no es necesario decirlo acá)

Figure \@ref(fig:eof1-regr-gh) shows regression maps of SON geopotential height anomalies upon cEOF1.
At 50 hPa (Figure \@ref(fig:eof1-regr-gh) row a), both the Real and Imaginary cEOF1 are associated with planetary wave 1 patterns, that are 90º out of phase.
Their phases coincide with the ones shown in Figure \@ref(fig:ceofs-1)a.1, with the positive centre of the real cEOF1 located towards the dateline, and the one of the Imaginary cEOF1 located over Eastern Antarctica.
However, the Real cEOF1 pattern is substantially altered by the zonally symmetric circulation.
Instead of a clear wave 1 pattern, the regression pattern can be better describes as a monopole with its centre displaced from the South Pole.

> \textcolor{red}{La figura 4 la veo muy saturada con los puntos que indican la significancia. ¿se podrán hacer con un tamaño menor? ¿Las unidades son correctas? Me llama la atención que te puedan dar tantos cientos de metros de altura geopotencial.}

Author: puede ser eso, por las dudas chequealo bien del archivo que estás usando

## cEOFs relationship with other variables {#other-variables}

\textcolor{red}{Este título queda raro porque después hablas de modos de variabilidad climática y no de lo que llamaríamos variables}

> 

Author: quizás podes decir "known" en vez de "other". 
Todavía igual debo confesar que no estoy convencido 100% de los títulos/subtítulos

> ## cEOFs relationship with other variables {#other-variables}
> 
> \textcolor{red}{Este título queda raro porque después hablas de modos de variabilidad climática y no de lo que llamaríamos variables}
> 

Reviewer: Sí, yo tampoco. Los puse más para ordenar la escritura, así que en prindipio pueden cambiarse todo lo que querramos. 

```suggestion
## cEOFs relationship with known modes of variability {#other-variables}
```

In the case of cEOF2, the moderate correlation between SAM and Imaginary cEOF2 becomes extremely high only when the zonally asymmetric variability of the SAM is considered.
The Imaginary cEOF2 explains up to `r scales::percent(max_r2[cEOF == "cEOF2"]$estimate^2, 2)` of A-SAM variance, reached the maximum value at `r max_r2[cEOF == "cEOF2"]$lev` hPa (Figure \@ref(fig:sam-eof-vertical).b2). 
Such extremely high correlation between the asymmetric SAM and the Imaginary cEOF2 suggests that these might be different ways of characterising the same phenomenon.

### PSA

> \textcolor{red}{Tabla 2. Mismo comentario que antes con lo del background color (no dice mucho si no se conoce la escala), quizás podes destacar en negritas según la significancia. ¿Está bien el intervalo de confianza de PSA2 vs cEOF2 Im? Hay algo raro ahí}

Author: mala mía. estaba confundiendome el guión del medio con un "-" y leía entre -0.36 y -0.25. Ahora si tiene mucho más sentido

The relationship between PSAs and the modes described from the cEOFs is also studied.
Table \@ref(tab:psa-eof2) shows the correlations between the two PSA indices and the timeseries for Real and Imaginary phase of cEOF2.

> \textcolor{red}{Valdría la pena aclarar por qué no consideras el cEOF1 para esta discusión}

Author: Ahí me parece mejor agregaría "the PSA patterns and the cEOF2 **spatial patterns (Fig. XX)**, we..."

> The relationship between PSAs and the modes described from the cEOFs is also studied.
> Table \@ref(tab:psa-eof2) shows the correlations between the two PSA indices and the timeseries for Real and Imaginary phase of cEOF2.
> \textcolor{red}{Valdría la pena aclarar por qué no consideras el cEOF1 para esta discusión}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to the similarity between the PSA patterns and the cEOF2 spatial patterns (Fig. \@ref(fig:eof2-regr-gh)), we study the relationship between these modes. 
Table \@ref(tab:psa-eof2) shows the correlations between the two PSA indices and the timeseries for Real and Imaginary phase of cEOF2.
```

To visualize that, Figure \@ref(fig:phase-histogram) shows an histogram that counts the number of SON years in which the cEOF2 was close to each of the four particular phases (positive/negative Real/Imaginary), with the observations for each season marked as rugs on the horizontal axis.
For instance, years with cEOF2 phase within 45º of 0º are nearest the "positive Real" phase.
About two thirds of time cEOF2 has a phase similar to either the negative or positive Imaginary phase.

> It could be seen that Imaginary phase is the most common phase and It is also the direction that has the maximum relationship with ENSO. \textcolor{red}{Ojo que todavía no estuvo la discusión con lo del ENSO, así que esto lo deberías decir más adelante.}

Author: si, eso es cierto. Quizás entonces aclararía algo como "It is also **by construction** the direction that has the maximum relationship with ENSO"

> It could be seen that Imaginary phase is the most common phase and It is also the direction that has the maximum relationship with ENSO. \textcolor{red}{Ojo que todavía no estuvo la discusión con lo del ENSO, así que esto lo deberías decir más adelante.}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It could be seen that Imaginary phase is the most common phase and It is also, by construction, the direction that has the maximum relationship with ENSO. 
```

  .[, term := factor_ReIm(term)]
```

(ref:o3-regr-cap) Regression of SON mean Total Ozone Column anomalies (shaded, Dobson Units) with the (a) real and (b) imaginary parts of the cEOF1 for the 1979 -- 2019 period.
On contours, the mean zonal anomaly of Total Ozone Column (negative contours in dashed lines, Dobson Units).
Areas marked with dots have p-values smaller than 0.05 adjusted for False Detection Rate.

> \textcolor{red}{Revisa que tenes una incosistencia en el uso de mayúsculas en Real/Imaginary porque a veces las usas y a veces no.}

Author: Sino encontramos alternativa por lo menos mantendría esa consistencia de usar siempre mayúsculas

```

There is a close spatial relationship between amplitudes and phases of the cEOF1 and TOC planetary wave 1 between `r knitr::combine_words(LatLabel(o3wave_lats))`.

> The correlation between the amplitude of both indices is `r wave1_cor[with == "amplitude"]$text`, while the overall correlation between the zonal wave 1 of ozone and cEOF1 (computed as the mean cosine of the difference in phase) is `r wave_correlation$text`. \textcolor{red}{¿Podrías clarificarlo? No estoy seguro de qué es lo que hiciste}
> As expected from the location of regressions in Figure \@ref(fig:o3-regr), the Real cEOF1 drives the relationship of amplitudes and the Imaginary cEOF1 drives the relationship of phases between the timeseries (not shown). \textcolor{red}{Tampoco me quedo claro qué estás diciendo con esto y cómo se explica.}

Reviewer: Sobre lo primero, es algo que, ahora que lo veo de nuevo, está mal, así que lo saco. Lo segundo está bien pero no es muy importante. La idea es que como el patrón del cEFO1 Real está en fase con la onda climatológica, cuando el cEOF1 Real varía, no cambia la fase de la onda de TOC, sino sólo la amplitud. Y al revés con la parte imaginaria. Creo que se puede borrar, también. 

```suggestion
The correlation between the amplitude of both indices is `r wave1_cor[with == "amplitude"]$text` and `r wave1_cor[with == "phase"]$text` between their phases. 
```

Author: ok

Besides, the Imaginary cEOF2 is associated with strong wave-like streamfunction anomalies emanating from the tropics (Figure \@ref(fig:sst-psi-2).b2). This is consistent with the effect of ENSO on the extratropics: SST anomalies initiate anomalous tropical convection that excites Rossby waves that propagate meridionally towards higher latitudes [@mo2000].

Since the Real cEOF2 represents just a different phase of the same wave train, it would be expected to show a similar forcing pattern to the Imaginary cEOF2 with a slight translation of its location.
However, Figure \@ref(fig:sst-psi-2).a1 and b1 show that the Real cEOF2 is not associated either with any significant SST nor streamfunction anomalies in the tropics.
The correlation between the Real cEOF2 and ENSO is also not significant (`r enso_cor[cEOF == "cEOF2" & part == "Real"]$text`). \textcolor{red}{Usaría notación científica por la cantidad de 0 que tiene}. This lack of tropical signal suggests different natures of the different phases of the Real cEOF2 wave train \textcolor{red}{¿Las diferentes fases del cEOF2 real? Me suena raro como quedo escrito.}
, which has \textcolor{red}{"have" según como está escrito}

>  the maximum amplitudes in the surroundings of southern South America.

Author: De acuerdo

>  the maximum amplitudes in the surroundings of southern South America.

Reviewer: Lo mando a #57 porque no se puede resolver acá.

(ref:pp-oceania-cap) Regression of SON mean precipitation anomalies in Oceania (mm per day, shaded) and (column a) cEOF1 the (row 1) Imaginary and (column 1) Real phase. For the 1979 -- 2019.

> Areas marked with dots have p-values smaller than 0.05 adjusted for False Detection Rate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Areas marked with dots have p-values smaller than 0.05 adjusted for False Detection Rate.
Black box is the region between `r knitr::combine_words(LonLabel(box_australia$lon))` and `r knitr::combine_words(LatLabel(box_australia$lat))`. 
```

Author: podes agregarle también el nombre que usas después (West Australia)

Reviewer: Sería así. 

```suggestion
Areas marked with dots have p-values smaller than 0.05 adjusted for False Detection Rate.
In black is the West Australia region, defined as the box between `r knitr::combine_words(LonLabel(box_australia$lon))` and `r knitr::combine_words(LatLabel(box_australia$lat))`.
```

Author: bien

> \textcolor{red}{Revisa el caption de la figura 14 que equedo un estilo distinto que los anteriores. Te falto aclarar también qué es la caja (¿la inventaste vos o habías utilizado la de algún otro trabajo?). Fijate también de aumentar la separación entre la columna izquierda y derecha para que no se superpongan los labels. También fijate que esta barra de colores no te quedo con el borde externo como el resto. }

Reviewer: La inventé yo a partir de mirar la zona con regresiones importantes.

Author: bueno, entonces eso aclara cuál es exactamente la región que estas considerando (latitudes-longitudes)

Reviewer: Está en el caption de la figura siguiente, pero lo pongo también en esta. Lo agregué arriba.

            fill = NA, colour = "gray20") 
```

The precipitation anomalies in Oceania associated with cEOF1 are weak and not statistically significant (Figure \@ref(fig:pp-oceania) column a) whereas cEOF2 is associated with large and widespread anomalies. The Real cEOF2 is associated with positive seasonal anomalies in Northern and Eastern Australia, and negative ones over New Zealand, while precipitation anomalies associated with Imaginary cEOF2 are negative over all Eastern Australia. As it could be expected, these negative anomalies are similar to the springtime precipitation anomalies observed in relation with the Asymmetric SAM [@campitelli2021] and ENSO [@cai2011].

> \textcolor{red}{Acá te faltaría  sacar un poco más el jugo asociando con la figura 11. Además, ¿revisaste si podes también usar algún resultado asociado a los PSA? }

Reviewer: ¿Te referís a resultados en la literatura?

Author: Dos cosas:
i) antes mostras las regresiones con función corriente, así que podrías relacionar con lo que te da en la precipitación.
ii) si en la literatura hay resultados que relacionen a los PSA con la lluvia de Sudamérica, también sería bueno incluirlos.

Reviewer: Ok lo veo con más detalle en #58.
